Collectemon
A Pokémon inspired game

HELP BOOKLET

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. INTRODUCTION

II. USER INTERFACE

III. ACCOUNT CREATION AND LOGIN

IV. CURRENCY, LEVELING, AND RARITY

V. CATCHING POKEMON

VI. POKESHOP

VII. STATS PAGE

VIII. BANK

IX. POKEMON MANAGER

X. TRADING

XI. LEADERBOARDS

XII. ACCOUNT DELETION

XIII. FAQ (Frequently Asked Questions)

XIV. LIMITATIONS

XV. CREDITS



















I. INTRODUCTION

    i. About Collectemon
       Welcome to Collectemon. Collectemon is a fan-based game inspired by Pokemon. It was made as a command-line game using Python and SQL.

    ii. Rationale
        Collectemon was made as a submission to Harvard CS50's final project, and also to entertain gamers of all ages.

    iii. Features
        Some of the game's features are a retro style black and white look, sound effects, user-friendly instructions, currencies like coins and gems, a leveling and points system,
        a security system to stop hackers, an ability to trade pokemon, and of course, over 1800 Pokemon to collect (~900 Pokemon and their Shiny counterparts, Gen 1 - 8)

    iv. Goal
        The goal of the game is to collect as many unique Pokemon as you can. Who will be the first player to collect all 1808 Pokemon?





II. USER INTERFACE

    i. On-screen instructions
       Collectemon's on screen instructions guide you throughout the game, helping you to access specific features. Here are some sample in game instructions:

    1.  Press:
        0 to catch Pokemon
        1 to go to the Pokeshop
        2 to view your stats
        3 to go to the bank
        4 to access your Pokemon Manager
        5 to trade with another player
        6 to access the Collectemon Leaderboards
        7 to view the Collectemon help booklet
        8 to quit

    2.  Wanna catch another pokemon? Input y for yes and n for no:

    3.  Type in the name of the Pokemon you want to release, or n to cancel:

    4.  Press enter to continue:

        To respond to instructions like 1, 2, and 3, simply type in the appropriate number / letter / name then hit enter
        To respond to instructions that say "Press enter", simply press enter ONCE. Pressing enter more than once may trigger bugs in the game.





III. ACCOUNT CREATION AND LOGIN

    i. Creating a new account
       Creating a new Collectemon account is simple. Simply type in a username (Only letters and numbers allowed), and a password (A combination of letters
       and numbers will do) and you're good to go! The system will alert you if the username you picked is already taken or invalid. Once your account is created,
       you'll receive a welcome gift of 1000 coins and 10 gems and can now play the game! IMPORTANT: Your username and password can't be changed, so choose wisely!

    ii. Logging in
        To login, simply type the username and password you used to create your account. For added security, your password won't be shown as you type it onscreen.





IV. CURRENCY, LEVELING, AND RARITY

    i. Currency
       Collectemon has 2 currencies: Coins and Gems. Coins are common and easy to get, while Gems are rare and therefore much more valuable.

       You can get coins by:
       1. Catching Pokemon or
       2. Exchanging gems for coins in the Bank

       You can get gems by:
       1. Catching Shiny Pokemon or
       2. Levelling up

       You can spend coins through buying Pokemon in the shop.

       You can spend gems through:
       1. Getting a Master Ball to guarantee a catch on a Pokemon which broke free
       2. Getting Legendary Pokemon in the shop or
       3. Exchanging them for coins in the Bank

    ii. Exp and Level
       Collectemon has an exp or experience system which allows you to level up once you hit a certain amount of exp.

       You can gain exp through:
       1. Catching Pokemon or
       2. Buying Pokemon in the shop

       Once you level up, you'll be rewarded with a certain amount of coins and gems depending on your level.

    iii. Rarities
       Collectemon features a rarity system which determines how rare a Pokemon is. It is on a scale of 1 - 10, 1 being most common and 10 being legendary.
       In addition, shiny Pokemon are much rarer than their Normal counterparts, so a Shiny Legendary is the hardest Pokemon to get.





V. CATCHING POKEMON

    i. Getting Pokeballs
       To get your Pokeballs, simply hit enter and the game will randomly give you 1 or 3 Pokeballs, Great Balls, or Ultra Balls. In addition, there's a slight
       chance to get a Master Ball, which guarantees a catch.

       Types of Pokeballs include:
       1. Pokeball: The most common ball, with the lowest catch chance in the game
       2. Great Ball: Uncommon, has an additional 15% catch chance compared to a Pokeball
       3. Ultra Ball: Rare, has an additional 15% catch chance compared to a Great Ball
       4. Master Ball: Super rare, guarantees a catch

    ii. Catching the Pokemon
       The Pokemon will appear through a text displayed onscreen in the format "A wild xxx appeared", where xxx is the Pokemon that's randomly selected.
       Catch chance will vary depending on the Pokeball used and the rarity of the Pokemon. To catch, simply hit enter and check if caught or if it broke free.
       You will have either 1 or 3 attempts to catch it, depending on how many balls you got.

    iii. Catch Outcomes
       1. If the Pokemon is caught, you will be asked if you want to keep it. If kept, you will receive coins, exp, and gems (if shiny) depending on its rarity.
       2. If it breaks free and you are out of balls, you will have the option to pay a certain amount of gems (depending on rarity) to get a Master Ball and guarantee a catch





VI. POKESHOP
    i. Features

       1. Collectemon's Pokeshop is the place to get the Pokemon you don't have yet without needing to catch them in the wild.
       2. 4 Pokemon will be chosen randomly, with an additional Legendary Pokemon as the special Legendary Offer.
       3. For convenience, an asterisk will be placed beside the Pokemon's name if you do not have it yet.
       4. Prices depend on the rarity of the Pokemon. To buy a Pokemon, simply follow the onscreen instructions.
       5. The game will also alert you if you do not have enough money to buy your desired Pokemon.
       6. You will see new Pokemon every time you visit the shop.





VII. STATS PAGE

    i. Stats Displayed
      The stats page displays the following:

      1. Total Pokemon caught - The total # of Pokemon you caught in-game
      2. Unique pokemon caught (Normal) - The total number of unique Normal Pokemon caught (No duplicates included)
      3. Unique pokemon caught (Shiny) - The total number of unique Shiny Pokemon caught (No duplicates included)
      4. Coins - Your current Coins
      5. Gems - Your current Gems
      6. Total Exp - Your cumulative exp
      7. Current Level - Your current level
      8. Exp needed to level up - How much exp left before you level up





VIII. BANK

    i. Function
       The bank serves as a place to exchange your gems to coins

    ii. Exchange Rates
        Exchange Rates vary from 100 - 250 coins per gem. They refresh every time you enter the Bank.





IX. POKEMON MANAGER

    i. Function
       The Pokemon Manager serves as a place to view, manage, or release your Pokemon, as well as check out other players' Pokemon. 
       Don't worry, in-game instructions will guide you in using it.





X. TRADING

    i. Function
       This is where you can trade with other players. To trade, simply provide the Pokemon you want to give and get, as well as the other player's username.
       You can only trade with one user at a time, and one Pokemon at a time. This means you can only give and receive one Pokemon to and from the other player.
       In addition, the other player needs to enter his/her password to confirm the trade.





XI. LEADERBOARDS

    i. Point system
       Collectemon's official leaderboard is based on total points. Points are based on how many unique Pokemon you have as well as your total exp. To check your points,
       update them first. You may do this under the Leaderboards section. IMPORTANT: To ensure that your points are accurate, be sure to update them first before checking
       the Official Collectemon Leaderboard.

    ii. Other Leaderboards
       Collectemon's other leaderboards include:

      1. Top 10 users with the most legends
      2. Top 10 users with the most total exp
      3. Top 10 users with the most Shiny Pokemon and
      4. Top 10 users with the most Pokemon

      Do take note that, in case there are less than 10 players registered in game, the leaderboards will only display a limited amount of info Ex. Top 8 / Top 4 only etc.

    iii. Official Collectemon Leaderboard
       This is Collectemon's official leaderboard, where you can view the best players in the game.
       Your ranking is based on how much points you currently have after updating them.





XII. ACCOUNT DELETION

    i. Deleting your account
       IMPORTANT: YOUR ACCOUNT, ONCE DELETED, CANNOT BE RECOVERED!
       If you are 100% sure that you want to delete your account, follow these steps carefully. Nothing will seem to happen at first, and that's fine.
       Make sure you are in the Main Menu. If there, follow these instructions:

       1. Type 68 then press enter
       2. Type 69 then press enter
       3. Type 76 then press enter
       4. Type 69 then press enter
       5. Type 84 then press enter
       6. Type 69 then press enter

       You will then have one last chance to decide before permanently deleting your account.
       IMPORTANT: If you make a mistake/typo, you must quit the game, login again, and start from step 1 before you can delete your account.





XIII. FAQ

    1. Why is the title of the game Collectemon?

      - It's a combination of the words Collect and Pokemon, as the goal of the game is to collect as much unique Pokemon as you can.

    2. What's with the steps for account deletion? Did you just make up those numbers?

      - Fun fact, those numbers are actually the ASCII codes which spell out the word "DELETE"

    3. How can I trade if the person who I want to trade with is not around?

      - Due to the limitations of this game, the person who you want to trade with must be around so he/she can enter his/her password.
        (Unless he/she tells you the password lol)

    4. Is there a penalty for duplicate Pokemon?

      - Well, no. Although you'd rather have 10 unique Pokemon than 10 of the same thing, right?

    5. I got 3 Ultra Balls yet failed to catch a Pokemon of rarity 1. Is the game rigged?

      - Short answer, no. Long answer: Even if Ultra Balls are the second best ball in the game, they don't guarantee a catch.
        There's still that small chance that the Pokemon will break free. Just keep catching Pokemon and I assure you that you'll get a lot eventually.

    6. I want a Legendary Pokemon. How can I get one easily?

      - My best advice is for you to keep catching Pokemon to level up and earn gems. That way, you can buy the Pokeshop's Legendary Offer and get a guaranteed Legend
        without having to catch it.
        Or, you can trade other Pokemon for a Legendary if your trade partner accepts that.

    7. How long did it take you to make this game, and how hard was it to make?

      - Around 2 weeks. Most of the code wasn't really that hard to make, except for maybe the Python dictionaries I had to use for the leaderboards,
       and keeping track of the sheer amount of while loops and break statements in my source code.
       Deciding the rarities of each Pokemon was a tedious process that involved quite a lot of research.
       The biggest challenge for me was implementing the formulas behind the game, such as

       i. Catch chances, or the probabilities of Pokemon of a specific rarity getting caught
       ii. Coins and exp gained depending on the Pokemon's rarity and if it's Normal / Shiny
       iii. Exp needed to level up and
       iv. Costs of buying Normal and Shiny Pokemon of a specific rarity in the shop.

    8. Why did you choose to make this specific game?

       - I'm a fan of Pokemon and I used to play it in my childhood. Now, I want to give back and give people a chance to enjoy a Pokemon-like game if they don't
         have access or can't afford to buy the official ones. Aside from this, I feel like it's a stepping stone before I venture into Game Development from CS50.

    9. What about Copyright issues?

       - This is merely a fan based game. It is NOT an official Pokemon game. All rights still go to Nintendo and Game Freak. No copyright infringement intended.





XIV. LIMITATIONS

    i. Graphics 
       As you have noticed, this game doesn't have graphics. I'm not experienced with game design and development yet, and Python and SQL also
       aren't typically languages used to develop games with graphics. On the upside, it does have that old retro look that takes you back to the beginnings
       of video games.

    ii. Singleplayer only
       Only one person at a time can play this game, due to SQL's limitations (Race Conditions)

    iii. Sensitive user input
       User input is extremely sensitive, so if let's say you press enter more than once, unintended bugs/glitches might occur in-game.





XV. CREDITS

Special thanks to:

My parents, who constantly supported be throughout this endeavor
and
CS50's staff
who guided me through learning about Computer Science

I couldn't have done this without them :)

